The human mind is an exceptional
problem solving machine.
Our ability to think broadly and make
abstract connections in the world around
us allows us to interpret nuances
in information that are so
far beyond the capabilities of machines.
However, we are fallible.
And it turns out there's been all sorts of
research that's identified very specific
ways in which we make mistakes,
and there are a lot of them.
Take a look at this diagram categorized
by Buster Benson and arranged by JM3.
Each one of these items is a specific
way we alter information to deviate from
reality.
We call these phenomena cognitive biases,
and most of us are susceptible to most,
if not all, of them.
Cognitive biases can impact
the way we look at data and
influence our interpretations of analysis.
We'll be hard pressed to cover all
this biases in one course let alone
in one video.
But what we will do is look at
some of the most common and
potentially damaging biases that
play on to our analytical process.
Specifically we'll look at
confirmation bias, the framing effect,
availability, or vividness bias, anchoring
and fundamental attribution error.
Let's start with confirmation bias.
Confirmation bias is the tendency to favor
information that confirms one's beliefs or
hypotheses.
There are really two ways that
we can exhibit this bias.
The first is by selectively
gathering information,
that is we only seek out data that
would serve to support a hypothesis and
fail to seek out data that
might disprove the hypothesis.
The second is by selectively
interpreting information.
This happens when we only focus on
data that supports our hypothesis
even when we have data that refutes it.
Here are a couple of examples.
Suppose we feel like our customer care
centers are not doing a good job.
We decide to send a survey to a sample
of customers that have called in, but
exclude customers who have
received credits on their bills
because these might be customers
whose satisfaction has been bought.
This would be an example of
selectively seeking out information.
Let's say that we were
analyzing sales results for
different locations in a region.
We believe their performance is strong but
when we look at the data we see that there
are a couple of locations that are
dragging down total sales below target.
We decide there must be something
wrong with the data and
we exclude those locations
from the analysis.
This would be an example of
selectively interpreting information.
In business there is often
pressure to show good results.
And this can subconsciously play into
how we gather and interpret information.
People can also have strong beliefs
about how things should be done, so
you tend to go after information
that supports their agenda.
As data analysts, we should try
our best to remain objective and
avoid both of these traps.
So that's confirmation bias.
Let's move on to the framing effect.
The framing effect is the tendency to draw
different conclusions from information
based on how it's presented.
To illustrate this we'll take
a classic example from research and
recast it in the hypothetical
business context.
Let's say we've completed an analysis
of how the restructure 600 bad business
investments and we're presenting
options to a set of decision makers.
If we do nothing,
all 600 investments will lose $100 each.
If we do something to an investment,
we have some chance it will make $100.
Otherwise, it still loses $100.
Let's say we outline the above scenario
and present the options as follows.
Option A,
200 investments will make $100 each.
Option B, there's a one-third probability
that all 600 investments will make
$100 each and a two-thirds probability
that all 600 will lose $100 each.
Research suggests that most
people would prefer option A,
when the options
are presented in this way.
However, let's say that we
presented the options like this.
Option A,
400 investments will loose $100 each.
Option B, there's a one-third probability
that none of the investments will loose
$100 and a two-thirds probability that
all the investments will loose $100.
In this case the resource suggest
that most people now choose option B.
Now, if you read closely,
you'll see that both cases
describe exactly the same choice.
Option A is a certainty
that loses $20,000 overall.
And option B has a one-third chance of
making $60,000 and a two-third chance of
losing $60,000 with the expected
outcome of the same net $20,000 loss.
Rationally, decision makers should
make the same choice in both scenarios
but they don't.
It turns out that framing
things in a positive way
can elicit different results than in
framing them in a more negative way.
As data analysts, we need to keep this
in mind both as we look at options and
make our own conclusions.
As well as how we present options and
recommend results to our decision maker.
It turns out there are other ways in
which how we are exposed to information
influences our thinking.
Availability or vividness bias is
the tendency to believe recent or
vivid events are more likely to occur.
There are all sorts of common examples
of this, like how people perceive
the risk of a plane crash or
getting attacked by a shark.
Both events are exceedingly rare, but
are often perceived to happen more
frequently than they actually do.
In the business context,
when will we see this bias
impact analysis is when small samples
of input highlight touchy topics.
For example, let's say we have
a focus group of seven people, and
two of them say they have
a problem with our product.
This input is vivid.
Not only is there a problem but
we're hearing about the problem through
a personal and possibly passionate
interaction with a customer.
It's also two out of seven people.
So we might jump to the conclusion that
nearly 30% of our products have issues.
This may or may not be that case.
But cognitively we tend to over
value these vivid examples.
Here's a real example
of something similar.
An executive at a wireless
carrier had spent an hour or so
in a call center listening to
interactions with customers.
Of the ten calls he heard, two of them
included complaints about dropped or
blocked calls.
He was already concerned
about network quality, so
he asked the analytics team to prove
that high levels of dropped and
blocked calls were leaving
the customers cancelling their service.
It turns out that not only was
the actual rate of dropped and
blocked calls extremely low, about 1%,
even when viewed at the customer level.
But, there was no discernible
relationship to cancellation.
In this example, not only was there
availability bias involved, but
also confirmation bias.
The executive was quick to pick up on data
that supported his belief that network
quality was an issue.
What's really interesting about this
example is not that it happened,
these type of analyses are pretty common.
But the exact same request was made two
more times by two different leaders, and
despite the results of the initial
analysis two more analyses were done only
to come to the same conclusion.
It turns out that some
biases are hard to overcome.
The good news is, we're actually able
to use data to show the truth and
prevent unnecessary actions that
wouldn't have had any impact.
Okay, let's talk about anchoring.
Anchoring is our tendency to focus or
rely too heavily on the first piece of
information that's available to us.
This bias is regularly exploited in
areas like pricing and negotiation.
For example, shoppers may respond more
favorably to a product that was priced at
$1,000 and marked down to $600 than
one that was simply listed for $600.
This is because the shopper
initially anchors at $1,000 and
relative to $1,000,
$600 seems like a good deal.
The way we look at data can
also be subject to anchoring.
Let's say that we're responsible for
doing the monthly 12-month sales forecast.
We make some assumptions and
run our first forecast,
which predicts average sales growth of 8%.
The next month we run
the same forecast and
come up with an average
sales growth of 14%.
Even though we think our methodology
is sound, because the estimate is so
much higher than the first forecast,
we back off some of our assumptions and
take the forecast down to
a more reasonable 12%.
In this case,
how we interpreted the second forecast
was anchored by our initial forecast.
As analysts,
we need to question our analyses.
But it's also important to question
why we're questioning our analysis.
And make sure we're asking
ourselves the right questions.
The last cognitive bias we'll discuss is
called the fundamental attribution error.
Fundamental attribution error impacts
how we interpret things that we observe
people doing.
Specifically we have a tendency
to focus on attributes or
intentions of the person
themselves versus the situation or
the environment when explaining
a person's behavior.
Where this comes into play in
analytics is often in the process of
translating analytical observations
into strategies and tactics for action.
If we misinterpret why and
how customers behave,
we may end up taking action that is
ineffective or counterproductive.
One of the more interesting places
I've seen this come up is in fraud.
I'm using the air quotes here because
the fraud itself is a negative term.
It implies dishonesty and
an active attempt to deceive.
Let's suppose that we sent a 50% discount
code out to a set of new customers to use
on our website.
Our intent with that it'd be for
new customers only,
and that the discount
can only be used once.
In fact, it clearly says just that in
the terms and conditions of the offer.
However, when we see the discount
being used far more than expected,
we look at the data and find that it's
being used by some existing customers and
in many cases more than once per customer.
Very quickly, ideas are generated
about how to stop the fraud and
identify abusers, cancel any pending
purchases and block them from the site.
What just happened here?
We've implicitly assumed anyone using the
code we sent out in a way we don't intend
are bad actors, and
we moved right to punitive solutions.
Are these really bad people or
are they just acting rationally in
the environment we created for them?
In my experience it's surely wise to give
people the benefit of the doubt and to
focus on the structures we create for them
in identifying problems and solutions.
This helps avoid attribution error.
Again, these are only a few of the many
ways we as humans are prone to
misinterpret information in situations.
If you find this interesting I
encourage you to explore some of
the other biases we saw
in the larger framework.
But for now the key takeaway from this
video is that even though we deal in hard
data we can still make mistakes
in how we interpret and
communicate that data, as well as in
how we frame options for taking action.
By being aware of these biases and
how they effect us,
we can train ourselves to avoid them and
minimize their influence on our work.